README.md, before:

# libMBTILES

![libmbtiles-logo](docs/images/libmbtiles.svg)


libMBTILES is a lightweight C++ utility library and command-line toolset for
working with [MBTiles](https://github.com/mapbox/mbtiles-spec) archives and tile
pyramids stored on disk. It provides:

- A static C++ library that exposes high-level helpers for extracting tiles,
  converting raster tiles to grayscale, down-sampling zoom levels, and reading
  or writing metadata inside an MBTiles database.
- A CLI built on top of the same primitives for quick one-off operations from
the shell.

This document walks through the available interfaces, explains how to build the
project, and demonstrates common usage patterns.

## Build and installation

### Prerequisites

- A C++17 compatible compiler (GCC ≥ 9, Clang ≥ 10, or MSVC ≥ 2019).
- CMake 3.15 or newer.
- A POSIX-like environment (macOS, Linux, WSL) is recommended. Windows builds
  are supported through CMake/Visual Studio, but the CLI examples below use
  POSIX-style shell syntax.

All third-party dependencies (SQLite3 and the stb image headers) are vendored in
`src/lib`, so no additional packages are required.

### Configure & build

```bash
cmake -S . -B build
cmake --build build
```

The build produces two artefacts:

- `build/libmbtiles/libmbtiles.a` – the static library.
- `build/mbtiles-cli` (or `mbtiles-cli.exe` on Windows) – the CLI frontend.

### Installing

To install the library, headers, and CLI binary into your CMake prefix (defaults
to `/usr/local` on Unix-like systems):

```bash
cmake --install build --prefix <install-prefix>
```

This copies `libmbtiles.a` to `<prefix>/lib`, installs the public headers under
`<prefix>/include`, and places the CLI executable in `<prefix>/bin`.

## Command-line interface

The CLI exposes several subcommands. Run `mbtiles-cli --help` to view the
top-level usage information, and append `--help` to individual subcommands for
detailed options.

```text
Usage: mbtiles-cli [OPTIONS] SUBCOMMAND
```

### `extract`

Extracts all tiles from an MBTiles SQLite database to a directory on disk.

```
mbtiles-cli extract <mbtiles> [--output-dir <dir>] [--pattern <pattern>] [--verbose]
```

| Option | Description |
| --- | --- |
| `mbtiles` | Required path to the MBTiles file. Must exist. |
| `-o`, `--output-dir` | Destination directory. Defaults to the current directory. |
| `-p`, `--pattern` | Filename pattern for each tile. Defaults to `{z}/{x}/{y}.jpg`. |
| `-v`, `--verbose` | Print progress information every 100 tiles. |

Patterns may reference placeholders to build informative paths:

| Placeholder | Meaning |
| --- | --- |
| `{z}`, `{x}`, `{y}` | Zoom level, X coordinate, and XYZ-formatted Y coordinate. |
| `{t}`, `{n}` | Latitude and longitude at the top-left corner of the tile (decimal degrees, 6 decimals). |
| `{Z}`, `{X}`, `{Y}` | Zero-padded zoom/X/Y. Repeat the letter to control the width (`{ZZZ}` → 3 digits). |
| `{T}`, `{N}` | Zero-padded leading digits of latitude/longitude. |
| `{ext}` | File extension inferred from the MBTiles metadata `format` value (falls back to tile data when missing). |

If the computed filename has no extension, libMBTILES prefers the metadata
`format` value to determine the suffix and falls back to detecting the tile data
(`.png`, `.jpg`, `.webp`, etc.).

Use `.{ext}` inside the pattern when you need the dot before the extension.

### `convert-gray`

Converts a directory tree of raster tiles to grayscale and writes the result to
a separate directory while preserving the directory structure.

```
mbtiles-cli convert-gray <input> <output> [--no-recursive] [--verbose]
```

- `input` – Source directory containing tile images (`.png`, `.jpg`, `.jpeg`).
- `output` – Target directory for grayscale tiles. Created if missing.
- `--no-recursive` – Only process files in the top-level directory. By default,
  subdirectories are traversed recursively.
- `-v`, `--verbose` – Print each converted file pair.

### `decrease-zoom`

Down-sample zoom levels from an MBTiles archive. The command can write the
resulting tiles to a directory (using a filename pattern) or directly into a new
MBTiles file.

```
mbtiles-cli decrease-zoom <mbtiles> <output> [--levels ...] [-p <pattern>] [-y] [-v] [--grayscale]
```

- `<mbtiles>` – Source MBTiles file. Must exist.
- `<output>` – Destination directory **or** a path ending in `.mbtiles`.
- `--levels` – List of zoom levels to include. Negative values are relative to
  the maximum zoom (for example `-1` generates the next zoom down from the
  highest level). Omit to generate just `max-1`.
- `-p`, `--pattern` – Filename pattern used when writing to a directory. The
  default is `{z}/{x}/{y}.{ext}` and it supports placeholders like `{z}`,
  `{x}`, `{y}`, and `{ext}`.
- `-y`, `--yes` – Overwrite existing outputs without prompting.
- `-v`, `--verbose` – Print progress details.
- `--grayscale` – Convert copied and generated tiles to grayscale. Directory
  outputs fall back to `.png` files if the pattern does not specify an image
  extension.

When writing to another MBTiles file, existing zoom levels listed via
`--levels` are copied as-is while any relative levels are generated by
down-sampling higher zooms. The output metadata is updated to reflect the new
minimum and maximum zooms.

### `metadata`

Inspect or modify the `metadata` table within an MBTiles archive.

```
mbtiles-cli metadata <list|get|set> ...
```

- `metadata list <mbtiles>` – Print all metadata key/value pairs.
- `metadata get <mbtiles> <key>` – Print the value for a specific key. Exits with
  status 1 if the key does not exist.
- `metadata set <mbtiles> <key> <value> [--no-overwrite]` – Insert or update a
  metadata entry. With `--no-overwrite`, the command fails if the key already
  exists.

### `view`

Serve a lightweight leaflet-based viewer for an MBTiles archive. The command
starts a small HTTP server that renders the tiles directly from the database.

```
mbtiles-cli view <mbtiles> [--host <host>] [--port <port>]
```

- `mbtiles` – Path to the MBTiles file to preview. Must exist.
- `--host` – IP address or hostname to bind. Defaults to `127.0.0.1`.
- `-p`, `--port` – TCP port for the HTTP server. Defaults to `8080`.

When the server starts it prints the local URL (for example
`http://127.0.0.1:8080`). Visit it in your browser to inspect the tiles. Use
`Ctrl+C` to stop the server.

### Exit codes

All subcommands return `0` on success. Non-zero exit codes are accompanied by an
error message on `stderr`. Invalid input, missing files, or SQLite failures are
reported via descriptive errors from the underlying library.

## C library interface

Include the main header to access the APIs:

```cpp
#include <mbtiles.h>
```

All symbols live in the `mbtiles` namespace. Errors are reported by throwing
`mbtiles::mbtiles_error`, which derives from `std::runtime_error` and can be
caught alongside other standard exceptions.

### Tile extraction

```cpp
std::size_t extract(const std::string &mbtiles_path,
                    const ExtractOptions &options = {});
```

`ExtractOptions` fields:

- `output_directory` – Root directory for extracted tiles (default: current
  directory).
- `pattern` – Output filename pattern (default: `{z}/{x}/{y}.jpg`). Supports the
  placeholders listed earlier in the CLI section.
- `verbose` – Print progress every 100 tiles to `std::cout`.

The function returns the number of tiles written. The MBTiles archive must use
the standard schema (`tiles` and `metadata` tables).

### Grayscale conversion

```cpp
void convert_directory_to_grayscale(const std::string &input_directory,
                                    const std::string &output_directory,
                                    const GrayscaleOptions &options = {});
```

`GrayscaleOptions` fields:

- `recursive` – Traverse subdirectories when `true` (default). Only the top
  level is processed when `false`.
- `verbose` – Emit a log line for each converted file.

The helper loads PNG or JPEG tiles into memory, converts pixels using the
standard luminance formula (`0.299 * R  0.587 * G  0.114 * B`), and writes the
result back using stb_image_write. Directory structures are mirrored into the
output tree.

### Zoom level down-sampling

```cpp
void decrease_zoom_level(const std::string &input_directory,
                         const std::string &output_directory,
                         const DecreaseZoomOptions &options = {});
```

`DecreaseZoomOptions` fields:

- `grayscale` – Convert output to grayscale before writing (default: `false`).
- `force_png` – Force PNG output even when input tiles are JPEG (default: `false`).
- `verbose` – Print progress for each generated tile.

The function scans the input tree to determine the highest available zoom level,
calculates parent tile coordinates, stitches together the four child tiles for
each parent, and resizes them to the appropriate dimensions using
`stb_image_resize2`. Missing child tiles trigger an exception.

### Metadata helpers

```cpp
std::map<std::string, std::string> read_metadata(const std::string &mbtiles_path);

void write_metadata_entries(const std::string &mbtiles_path,
                            const std::map<std::string, std::string> &entries,
                            bool overwrite_existing = true);

void write_metadata_entry(const std::string &mbtiles_path,
                          const std::string &key,
                          const std::string &value,
                          bool overwrite_existing = true);

std::vector<std::string> metadata_keys(const std::string &mbtiles_path);
```

- `read_metadata` returns a map of metadata entries sorted by key.
- `write_metadata_entries` inserts or updates multiple entries inside a single
  transaction. When `overwrite_existing` is `false`, existing keys cause the
  operation to fail.
- `write_metadata_entry` is a convenience wrapper for inserting a single key.
- `metadata_keys` reads only the key names, ordered alphabetically.

These helpers automatically create the `metadata` table if it does not exist and
wrap modifications in a transaction to keep the database consistent.

### Error handling

All operations may throw `mbtiles_error` when encountering filesystem problems,
invalid patterns, unsupported zoom levels, or SQLite errors. Catch the exception
in client code to surface a descriptive message to end users:

```cpp
try {
    const auto count = mbtiles::extract("tiles.mbtiles");
    std::cout << "Extracted " << count << " tiles\n";
} catch (const mbtiles::mbtiles_error &ex) {
    std::cerr << "Extraction failed: " << ex.what() << std::endl;
}
```

## Contributing

Bug reports and pull requests are welcome. Please format new C code to match
the existing style and include tests or reproducible scenarios for functional
changes.


## License

MIT License

Commit message:

feat: rename decrease-zoom to resize and enhance zoom level handling
Rename the `decrease-zoom` command to `resize` to better reflect its expanded functionality. The command now supports both down-sampling and up-sampling of zoom levels, allowing generation of zoom levels below the minimum and above the maximum available in the source MBTiles archive.

Key changes:
- Updated command name from `decrease-zoom` to `resize`
- Enhanced `--levels` option to accept prefixed values (- for below min, + for above max)
- Updated documentation and function signatures throughout
- Improved flexibility in zoom level generation while maintaining backward compatibility

README.md, after:

# libMBTILES

![libmbtiles-logo](docs/images/libmbtiles.svg)


libMBTILES is a lightweight C++ utility library and command-line toolset for
working with [MBTiles](https://github.com/mapbox/mbtiles-spec) archives and tile
pyramids stored on disk. It provides:

- A static C++ library that exposes high-level helpers for extracting tiles,
  converting raster tiles to grayscale, down-sampling zoom levels, and reading
  or writing metadata inside an MBTiles database.
- A CLI built on top of the same primitives for quick one-off operations from
the shell.

This document walks through the available interfaces, explains how to build the
project, and demonstrates common usage patterns.

## Build and installation

### Prerequisites

- A C++17 compatible compiler (GCC ≥ 9, Clang ≥ 10, or MSVC ≥ 2019).
- CMake 3.15 or newer.
- A POSIX-like environment (macOS, Linux, WSL) is recommended. Windows builds
  are supported through CMake/Visual Studio, but the CLI examples below use
  POSIX-style shell syntax.

All third-party dependencies (SQLite3 and the stb image headers) are vendored in
`src/lib`, so no additional packages are required.

### Configure & build

```bash
cmake -S . -B build
cmake --build build
```

The build produces two artefacts:

- `build/libmbtiles/libmbtiles.a` – the static library.
- `build/mbtiles-cli` (or `mbtiles-cli.exe` on Windows) – the CLI frontend.

### Installing

To install the library, headers, and CLI binary into your CMake prefix (defaults
to `/usr/local` on Unix-like systems):

```bash
cmake --install build --prefix <install-prefix>
```

This copies `libmbtiles.a` to `<prefix>/lib`, installs the public headers under
`<prefix>/include`, and places the CLI executable in `<prefix>/bin`.

## Command-line interface

The CLI exposes several subcommands. Run `mbtiles-cli --help` to view the
top-level usage information, and append `--help` to individual subcommands for
detailed options.

```text
Usage: mbtiles-cli [OPTIONS] SUBCOMMAND
```

### `extract`

Extracts all tiles from an MBTiles SQLite database to a directory on disk.

```
mbtiles-cli extract <mbtiles> [--output-dir <dir>] [--pattern <pattern>] [--verbose]
```

| Option | Description |
| --- | --- |
| `mbtiles` | Required path to the MBTiles file. Must exist. |
| `-o`, `--output-dir` | Destination directory. Defaults to the current directory. |
| `-p`, `--pattern` | Filename pattern for each tile. Defaults to `{z}/{x}/{y}.jpg`. |
| `-v`, `--verbose` | Print progress information every 100 tiles. |

Patterns may reference placeholders to build informative paths:

| Placeholder | Meaning |
| --- | --- |
| `{z}`, `{x}`, `{y}` | Zoom level, X coordinate, and XYZ-formatted Y coordinate. |
| `{t}`, `{n}` | Latitude and longitude at the top-left corner of the tile (decimal degrees, 6 decimals). |
| `{Z}`, `{X}`, `{Y}` | Zero-padded zoom/X/Y. Repeat the letter to control the width (`{ZZZ}` → 3 digits). |
| `{T}`, `{N}` | Zero-padded leading digits of latitude/longitude. |
| `{ext}` | File extension inferred from the MBTiles metadata `format` value (falls back to tile data when missing). |

If the computed filename has no extension, libMBTILES prefers the metadata
`format` value to determine the suffix and falls back to detecting the tile data
(`.png`, `.jpg`, `.webp`, etc.).

Use `.{ext}` inside the pattern when you need the dot before the extension.

### `convert-gray`

Converts a directory tree of raster tiles to grayscale and writes the result to
a separate directory while preserving the directory structure.

```
mbtiles-cli convert-gray <input> <output> [--no-recursive] [--verbose]
```

- `input` – Source directory containing tile images (`.png`, `.jpg`, `.jpeg`).
- `output` – Target directory for grayscale tiles. Created if missing.
- `--no-recursive` – Only process files in the top-level directory. By default,
  subdirectories are traversed recursively.
- `-v`, `--verbose` – Print each converted file pair.

### `resize`

Resize tiles to generate new zoom levels or copy existing ones from an MBTiles
archive. The command can write the resulting tiles to a directory (using a
filename pattern) or directly into a new MBTiles file.

```
mbtiles-cli resize <mbtiles> <output> [--levels ...] [-p <pattern>] [-y] [-v] [--grayscale]
```

- `<mbtiles>` – Source MBTiles file. Must exist.
- `<output>` – Destination directory **or** a path ending in `.mbtiles`.
- `--levels` – List of zoom levels to include. Prefix values with `-` to request
  zoom levels below the minimum (e.g. `-1` generates `min-1`) or with `+` to
  request levels above the maximum (e.g. `+1` generates `max+1`). Unprefixed
  values are treated as absolute zoom numbers. Omit the option to generate a
  single level at `min-1`.
- `-p`, `--pattern` – Filename pattern used when writing to a directory. The
  default is `{z}/{x}/{y}.{ext}` and it supports placeholders like `{z}`,
  `{x}`, `{y}`, and `{ext}`.
- `-y`, `--yes` – Overwrite existing outputs without prompting.
- `-v`, `--verbose` – Print progress details.
- `--grayscale` – Convert copied and generated tiles to grayscale. Directory
  outputs fall back to `.png` files if the pattern does not specify an image
  extension.

When writing to another MBTiles file, existing zoom levels listed via
`--levels` are copied as-is while new levels are synthesized by down-sampling or
up-sampling neighbouring zoom levels. The output metadata is updated to reflect
the resulting minimum and maximum zoom values.

### `metadata`

Inspect or modify the `metadata` table within an MBTiles archive.

```
mbtiles-cli metadata <list|get|set> ...
```

- `metadata list <mbtiles>` – Print all metadata key/value pairs.
- `metadata get <mbtiles> <key>` – Print the value for a specific key. Exits with
  status 1 if the key does not exist.
- `metadata set <mbtiles> <key> <value> [--no-overwrite]` – Insert or update a
  metadata entry. With `--no-overwrite`, the command fails if the key already
  exists.

### `view`

Serve a lightweight leaflet-based viewer for an MBTiles archive. The command
starts a small HTTP server that renders the tiles directly from the database.

```
mbtiles-cli view <mbtiles> [--host <host>] [--port <port>]
```

- `mbtiles` – Path to the MBTiles file to preview. Must exist.
- `--host` – IP address or hostname to bind. Defaults to `127.0.0.1`.
- `-p`, `--port` – TCP port for the HTTP server. Defaults to `8080`.

When the server starts it prints the local URL (for example
`http://127.0.0.1:8080`). Visit it in your browser to inspect the tiles. Use
`Ctrl+C` to stop the server.

### Exit codes

All subcommands return `0` on success. Non-zero exit codes are accompanied by an
error message on `stderr`. Invalid input, missing files, or SQLite failures are
reported via descriptive errors from the underlying library.

## C library interface

Include the main header to access the APIs:

```cpp
#include <mbtiles.h>
```

All symbols live in the `mbtiles` namespace. Errors are reported by throwing
`mbtiles::mbtiles_error`, which derives from `std::runtime_error` and can be
caught alongside other standard exceptions.

### Tile extraction

```cpp
std::size_t extract(const std::string &mbtiles_path,
                    const ExtractOptions &options = {});
```

`ExtractOptions` fields:

- `output_directory` – Root directory for extracted tiles (default: current
  directory).
- `pattern` – Output filename pattern (default: `{z}/{x}/{y}.jpg`). Supports the
  placeholders listed earlier in the CLI section.
- `verbose` – Print progress every 100 tiles to `std::cout`.

The function returns the number of tiles written. The MBTiles archive must use
the standard schema (`tiles` and `metadata` tables).

### Grayscale conversion

```cpp
void convert_directory_to_grayscale(const std::string &input_directory,
                                    const std::string &output_directory,
                                    const GrayscaleOptions &options = {});
```

`GrayscaleOptions` fields:

- `recursive` – Traverse subdirectories when `true` (default). Only the top
  level is processed when `false`.
- `verbose` – Emit a log line for each converted file.

The helper loads PNG or JPEG tiles into memory, converts pixels using the
standard luminance formula (`0.299 * R  0.587 * G  0.114 * B`), and writes the
result back using stb_image_write. Directory structures are mirrored into the
output tree.

### Zoom level resizing

```cpp
void resize_zoom_levels(const std::string &input_mbtiles,
                        const std::string &output_path,
                        const ResizeOptions &options = {});
```

`ResizeOptions` fields:

- `target_levels` – Zoom levels to include in the output. When empty the
  function generates the level directly below the minimum zoom present in the
  source archive.
- `pattern` – Filename pattern used when extracting tiles to a directory. This
  is ignored when the output is another MBTiles file.
- `verbose` – Print progress information while generating levels.
- `grayscale` – Convert tiles to grayscale before writing.

The routine inspects the source archive to determine available zoom levels,
loads tiles on demand, and produces new zoom levels by either merging four
child tiles (down-sampling) or splitting a tile into four children (up-sampling)
with `stb_image_resize2`. Results can be written to a directory structure or to
a new MBTiles database.

### Metadata helpers

```cpp
std::map<std::string, std::string> read_metadata(const std::string &mbtiles_path);

void write_metadata_entries(const std::string &mbtiles_path,
                            const std::map<std::string, std::string> &entries,
                            bool overwrite_existing = true);

void write_metadata_entry(const std::string &mbtiles_path,
                          const std::string &key,
                          const std::string &value,
                          bool overwrite_existing = true);

std::vector<std::string> metadata_keys(const std::string &mbtiles_path);
```

- `read_metadata` returns a map of metadata entries sorted by key.
- `write_metadata_entries` inserts or updates multiple entries inside a single
  transaction. When `overwrite_existing` is `false`, existing keys cause the
  operation to fail.
- `write_metadata_entry` is a convenience wrapper for inserting a single key.
- `metadata_keys` reads only the key names, ordered alphabetically.

These helpers automatically create the `metadata` table if it does not exist and
wrap modifications in a transaction to keep the database consistent.

### Error handling

All operations may throw `mbtiles_error` when encountering filesystem problems,
invalid patterns, unsupported zoom levels, or SQLite errors. Catch the exception
in client code to surface a descriptive message to end users:

```cpp
try {
    const auto count = mbtiles::extract("tiles.mbtiles");
    std::cout << "Extracted " << count << " tiles\n";
} catch (const mbtiles::mbtiles_error &ex) {
    std::cerr << "Extraction failed: " << ex.what() << std::endl;
}
```

## Contributing

Bug reports and pull requests are welcome. Please format new C code to match
the existing style and include tests or reproducible scenarios for functional
changes.


## License

MIT License
